Index (#68)
UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience: index.Rmd

| Question type | Description | Example |
|---------------|-------------|---------|
| Descriptive | A question which asks about summarized characteristics of a data set without interpretation (i.e., report a fact). | How many people live in each province or territory in Canada? |
| Exploratory | A question asks if there are patterns, trends, or relationships within a single data set. Often used to propose hypotheses for future study. | Does political party voting change with indicators of wealth in a set of data collected from groups of individuals from several regions in Canada? |

> | Inferential | A question that looks for patterns, trends, or relationships in a single data set **and** also asks for quantification of how applicable these findings are to the wider population. | Does political party voting change with indicators of wealth in Canada? |

Reviewer: For the questions in the table, maybe we can differentiate the "Inferential" a little more by indicating that this question is referring to a population. And that way we can contrast an exploratory and inferential question by making it essentially the same question but changing the group it's referring to, something like: "Does political party voting change with indicators of wealth for every single person in Canada?" (or something along those lines) and then exploratory is the same question but just about the data

Author: Fixed in 6fdf3cf

it with quotes like the filename. This is because we are formally telling R about this word and giving it a value. Only characters and words that act as values need 
to be surrounded by quotes.

Let's now use the assignment symbol to give the name `can_lang` to the language data collected in the 2016 Canadian census data frame that we get from `read_csv`.

```{r load_data_with_name, message=FALSE}
can_lang <- read_csv("data/can_lang.csv")
```

> Wait a minute! Nothing happened this time! Or at least it looks like that. But actually something did happen: the data was read in and now has the name `us_data` associated with it. 

Author: Thanks for catching this!

```{r print}
can_lang
```

## Creating subsets of data frames with `select` & `filter`

Now, we are going to learn how to obtain subsets of data from a data frame in R using two other `tidyverse` functions: `select` and `filter`. 
The `select` function allows you to create a subset of the columns of a data frame, while the `filter` function allows you to obtain a subset of the rows with specific values.

Before we start using `select` and `filter`, let's take a look at the language data collected in the 2016 Canadian census again to familiarize ourselves with it. 
We will do this by printing the data we loaded earlier in the chapter to the screen. 

```{r print_data_again}
can_lang
```

In this data frame there are 214 rows rows (corresponding to the 214 languages recorded on the 2016 Canadian census)
and 6 columns: 

1. `category`: Higher level language category (describing whether the language is an Official Canadian language, an Aboriginal language, or a Non-Official and Non-Aboriginal language).
2. `language`: Language queried about on the Canadian Census.

> 3. `mother_tongue`: Total Count of Canadians from the Census who reported the language as their mother tongue. Mother tongue is generally defined as the language someone was exposed to since birth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `mother_tongue`: Total count of Canadians from the Census who reported the language as their mother tongue. Mother tongue is generally defined as the language someone was exposed to since birth.
```

> 4. `most_at_home`: Total Count of Canadians from the Census who reported the language as spoken most often at home.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. `most_at_home`: Total count of Canadians from the Census who reported the language as spoken most often at home.
```

> 5. `most_at_work`: Total Count of Canadians from the Census who reported the language as used most often at work for the population.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. `most_at_work`: Total count of Canadians from the Census who reported the language as used most often at work for the population.
```

> 6. `lang_known`: Total Count of Canadians from the Census who reported knowledge of language for the population in private households.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. `lang_known`: Total count of Canadians from the Census who reported knowledge of the language for the population in private households.
```

we have given to data frames in the code we have already written.

With these arguments, `filter` returns a data frame that has all the columns of the input data frame but only the rows we asked for in our logical filter statement. 

```{r}
mandarin <- filter(can_lang, language == "Mandarin")
mandarin
```

### Using `filter` to extract rows with values above a threshold

If we are interested in finding information about the languages who have a higher number of people who primarily speak it at home compared to Mandarin---which is reported to have 462890 people speaking it as the primary language they speak in their home---then we can create a filter 
to obtain rows where the value of `most_at_home` is greater than 462890.
In this case, we see that `filter` returns a data frame with 16 rows; this indicates that there are 16 
states with higher median household incomes than New York.

```{r}
spoke_often_at_home <- filter(can_lang, most_at_home > 462890)
spoke_often_at_home
```

## Exploring data with visualizations

> Creating effective data visualizations is an essential piece to any data analysis. For the remainder of Chapter 1, we will learn how to use

Reviewer: Suggestion for this paragraph: 

Creating effective data visualizations is an essential piece of any data analysis. For the remainder of Chapter 1, we will learn how to use functions from the tidyverse package to make visualizations that let us explore relationships in data. In particular, we’ll develop a visualization of the language data collected in the 2016 Canadian census we’ve been working with that will help us understand two potential relationships in the data. First, we will explore the relationship between the number of people who speak a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak it as their primary language at home. And second, we will explore whether there a pattern in the strength of this relationship in the higher-level language categories (Official languages, Aboriginal languages, or non-official and non-Aboriginal languages). These questions are examples of exploratory data analysis questions: we are looking for relationships and patterns within the data set we have, but are not trying to generalize what we find to others beyond this data set.

functions from the `tidyverse` to make visualizations that let us explore relationships in data. In particular, we'll develop a visualization
of the language data collected in the 2016 Canadian census we've been working with that will help us understand two potential relationships in the data:
first, the relationship between the number of people who speak a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak that language as their primary spoken language at home, and second, whether there is a pattern in the strength of this relationship in the higher level language categories (Official languages, Aboriginal languages, or non-official and non-Aboriginal languages). This is an example of an exploratory data analysis 
question: we are looking for relationships and patterns within the data set we have, but are not trying to generalize what we find beyond this data set. 

> ### Using `ggplot` to create a scatter plot

Reviewer: The code for the plots in this section are centred so it looks a little off

Taking another look at our data set below, we can immediately see that the three columns (or variables) we are interested in visualizing---mother tongue, language spoken most at home, and higher level language category---are all in separate columns. In addition, there is a single row (or observation) for each language. 

> The data are therefore in what we call a *tidy data* format. 

Author: Added that we will formally introduce tidy data in chapter 3 in 1e71bcff9964f

> The data are therefore in what we call a *tidy data* format. 

Author: Added that we will formally introduce tidy data in chapter 3 in 1e71bcff9964f

This is particularly important and will be a major focus in the remainder of this course: many of the functions from `tidyverse` require tidy data, 
including the `ggplot` function that we will use shortly for our visualization. 

```{r}
can_lang
```

> ### Using `ggplot` to create a scatter plot

Author: fixed in e20b1f8bb7

One common and easy way to format your `ggplot` visualization is to add additional layers to the plot object using the `+` symbol. 
For example, we can use the `xlab` and `ylab` functions to add layers where we specify human readable labels for the x and y axes. 
Again, since we are specifying words (e.g. `"Mother tongue (number of Canadian residents)"`) as arguments to `xlab` and `ylab`, we surround them with double quotes.
There are many more layers we can add to format the plot further, and we will explore these in later chapters.

<center>
```{r mother_tongue_vs_most_at_home_labs, fig.width=5.75, fig.height=5, warning=FALSE}
ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home, y = mother_tongue)) +
    geom_point() +
    xlab("Language spoken most at home (number of Canadian residents)") +
    ylab("Mother tongue (number of Canadian residents)")    
```
</center>

> Most of the data points from the 214 observations in this data set are bunched up in the lower left-handside of this visualization. This is because many many more people in Canada speak the two official languages (English and French). Thus to answer our question, we will need to adjust the scale of the x and y axes so that they are on a log scale. We can again add additional layers to the plot object using the `+` symbol to do this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the data points from the 214 observations in this data set are bunched up in the lower-left hand side of this visualization. This is because many more people in Canada speak the two official languages (English and French). Thus to answer our question, we will need to adjust the scale of the x and y axes so that they are on a log scale. We can again add additional layers to the plot object using the `+` symbol to do this:
```

```{r mother_tongue_vs_most_at_home_scale, fig.width=5.75, fig.height=5, warning=FALSE}
ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home, y = mother_tongue)) +
  geom_point() +
  xlab("Language spoken most at home (number of Canadian residents)") +
  ylab("Mother tongue (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = scales::comma)
```

From this visualization we see that for the 214 languages in this data set, as the number of people who have a language as their mother tongue increases, so does the number of people who speak that language at home. When we see 
two variables do this, we call this a *positive relationship*. Because the increasing pattern is fairly clear 

> (not fuzzy) we can say that the relationship is strong. Because drawing a straight line through these 

Author: Changed language to that points being close together in d888bfcc9be09

points would fit the pattern we observe quite well, we say that it's linear.

Learning how to describe data visualizations is a very useful skill. We will provide descriptions for you in this course (as we did above) until we get to Chapter 4, 
which focuses on data visualization. Then, we will explicitly teach you how to do this yourself, and how to not over-state or over-interpret the results 
from a visualization.

> ### Coloring points by group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Colouring points by group
```

> Now we'll move onto the second part of our exploratory data analysis question: when considering the relationship between the number of people who have a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak that language at home, is there a pattern in the strength of this relationship in the higher level language categories (Official languages, Aboriginal languages, or non-official and non-Aboriginal languages)? One common way to explore this is to colour the data points on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we'll move onto the second part of our exploratory data analysis question: when considering the relationship between the number of people who have a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak that language at home, is there a pattern in the strength of this relationship in the higher-level language categories (Official languages, Aboriginal languages, or non-official and non-Aboriginal languages)? One common way to explore this is to colour the data points on the 
```

scatter plot we have already created by group/category. For example,

> given that we have the higher level language category for each language recorded in the 2016 Canadian census, we can colour the points in our previous 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given that we have the higher-level language category for each language recorded in the 2016 Canadian census, we can colour the points in our previous 
```

> scatter plot to represent the higher level language category each language belongs to. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scatter plot to represent each language's higher-level language category.
```

To do this we modify our scatter plot code above. Specifically, we will add an argument to the `aes` function, specifying that the points should be coloured by the `category` column:

<center>
```{r scatter_colour_by_category, fig.width=7.75, fig.height=4, warning=FALSE}
ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home, y = mother_tongue, color = category)) +
  geom_point() +
  xlab("Language spoken most at home (number of Canadian residents)") +
  ylab("Mother tongue (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = scales::comma)
```
</center>

This data visualization shows that there a few languages where no one in Canada has reported it the language they speak most at home, let's use filter to look at the row that contains these values:

```{r}
no_most_at_home <- filter(can_lang, most_at_home == 0)
no_most_at_home
```

> Let's remove these rows from the data frame`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's remove these rows from the data frame. 
```

To do this, we use the opposite of the equivalency operator (`==`) for our filter statement, the not equivalent operator (`!=`).

```{r}
can_lang_filtered <- filter(can_lang, most_at_home != 0)
can_lang_filtered
```

Now we see that the data frame has 211 instead of 214. 
Let's now recreate the scatter plot we made above using this data frame subset:

```{r scatter_colour_by_category_filtered, fig.width=7.75, fig.height=4, warning=FALSE}
ggplot(can_lang_filtered, aes(x = most_at_home, y = mother_tongue, color = category)) +
  geom_point() +
  xlab("Language spoken most at home (number of Canadian residents)") +
  ylab("Mother tongue (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = scales::comma)
```

> What do we see when considering the second part of our exploratory question? Do we see a pattern in the relationship between the number of people who speak a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak a language as their primary spoken language at home for the different higher-level language categories? Probably not! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What do we see when considering the second part of our exploratory question? Do we see a difference in the pattern of the relationship between the number of people who speak a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak a language as their primary spoken language at home between higher-level language categories? Probably not!
```

For each higher-level language category there appears to be a positive relationship between the number of people who speak a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak a language as their primary spoken language at home. This relationship looks similar, regardless of the category. 

> Does this mean that the relationship between the number of people who speak a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak a language as their primary spoken language at home is positive for all languages in the world? Or could we use this data visualization on its own to predict how many people have a given language as their mother tongue if we know how many people speak it as their primarly language at home?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Does this mean that this relationship is positive for all languages in the world? Can we use this data visualization on its own to predict how many people have a given language as their mother tongue if we know how many people speak it as their primary language at home?
```

> The answer to both these questions is "no." What we can do with this exploratory data analysis is create new hypotheses, ideas, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The answer to both these questions is "no." However, with this exploratory data analysis, we can create new hypotheses, ideas,
```

> One common and easy way to format your `ggplot` visualization is to add additional layers to the plot object using the `+` symbol. 

Reviewer: Maybe here we can say something commenting on the plot we made above in 6.1.2 just to give a little more motivation for the code that follows. Kind of like: Yes, we have plotted a scatterplot, but we aren't done yet -- there's more that we can do to improve the interpretability of the plot. For instance, most people won't know what "mother_tongue" means without more explanation etc...

Author: Addressed in 36c7989

ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home, y = mother_tongue)) +
  geom_point() +
  xlab("Language spoken most at home (number of Canadian residents)") +
  ylab("Mother tongue (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = scales::comma)
```

From this visualization we see that for the 214 languages in this data set, as the number of people who have a language as their mother tongue increases, so does the number of people who speak that language at home. When we see 
two variables do this, we call this a *positive relationship*. Because the points are fairly close together, we can say that the relationship is strong. Because drawing a straight line through these 
points would fit the pattern we observe quite well, we say that it's linear.

Learning how to describe data visualizations is a very useful skill. We will provide descriptions for you in this course (as we did above) until we get to Chapter 4, 
which focuses on data visualization. Then, we will explicitly teach you how to do this yourself, and how to not over-state or over-interpret the results 
from a visualization.

### Changing the units

> ```{r}

Reviewer: I think this code block needs a little explanation before it

Author: I am not sure what this comment is referring to, can you please clarify @leem44 ?

english_mother_tongue <- can_lang %>% 
  filter(language == "English") %>% 
  pull(mother_tongue)
census_popn <- 35151728
```

> What does it mean that `r format(english_mother_tongue, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")` people reported that their mother tongue was English in the 2016 Canadian census? To really understand this number, we need context, in particular, how many people are there were in Canada when this data was collected? From the 2016 Canadian census profile we can see that the population was reported to be `r format(census_popn, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")` people. The absolute count of the number of people who report that English is their mother tongue is much more meaningful when we report it in this context. We can even go a step further and transform this absolute count to a relative frequency, or proportion, so that we can represent this as a single meaningful number in our data visualizations. We can do this by dividing the count of the number of people reporting a given language as their mother tongue by the count of the number of peole who live in Canada. For example, the proportion of people who eported that their mother tongue was English in the 2016 Canadian census was `r format(round(english_mother_tongue/census_popn, 2), scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What does it mean that `r format(english_mother_tongue, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")` people reported that their mother tongue was English in the 2016 Canadian census? To really understand this number, we need context. In particular, how many people were in Canada when this data was collected? From the 2016 Canadian census profile, we can see that the population was reported to be `r format(census_popn, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")` people. The absolute count of the number of people who report that English is their mother tongue is much more meaningful when we report it in this context. We can even go a step further and transform this absolute count to a relative frequency, or proportion, so that we can represent this as a single meaningful number in our data visualizations. We can do this by dividing the number of people reporting a given language as their mother tongue by the number of people who live in Canada. For example, the proportion of people who reported that their mother tongue was English in the 2016 Canadian census was `r format(round(english_mother_tongue/census_popn, 2), scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")`.
```

Author: Accepted this, but will modify further as I have no idea why I thought I should call it an absolute count as opposed to a count.

```{r}
can_lang <- mutate(can_lang, mother_tongue = mother_tongue / 35151728)
can_lang
```

Let's also do this for the counts of the number of people who report that they speak a given language most often at home:

```{r}
can_lang <- mutate(can_lang, most_at_home = most_at_home / 35151728)
can_lang
```

Finally, let's visualize the data now that we have represented it as proportions (and change our axis labels to reflect this change in units!):

<center>
```{r mother_tongue_vs_most_at_home_scale_props, fig.width=5.75, fig.height=5, warning=FALSE}
ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home, y = mother_tongue)) +
  geom_point() +
  xlab("Language spoken most at home (proportion of Canadian residents)") +
  ylab("Mother tongue (proportion of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = scales::comma)
```
</center>

> From the visualization above, we can now clearly see that not just a lot, but that the majority Canadians reported English as their mother tongue and as the language they speak most often at home. Changing the units to include this context increases our understanding and allows us to better interpret the numbers in our data set.

Reviewer: > 
```suggestion
From the visualization above, we can now clearly see that not just a lot, but that the majority of Canadians reported English as their mother tongue and as the language they speak most often at home. Changing the units to include this context increases our understanding and allows us to interpret the numbers in our data set better.
```

### Coloring points by group

> Now we'll move onto the second part of our exploratory data analysis question: when considering the relationship between the number of people who have a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak that language at home, is there a pattern in the strength of this relationship in the higher level language categories (Official languages, Aboriginal languages, or non-official and non-Aboriginal languages)? One common way to explore this is to colour the data points on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we'll move onto the second part of our exploratory data analysis question: when considering the relationship between the number of people who have a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak that language at home, is there a pattern in the strength of this relationship in the higher-level language categories (Official languages, Aboriginal languages, or non-official and non-Aboriginal languages)? One common way to explore this is to colour the data points on the 
```

scatter plot we have already created by group/category. For example,
given that we have the higher level language category for each language recorded in the 2016 Canadian census, we can colour the points in our previous 
scatter plot to represent each language's higher-level language category.

> To do this we modify our scatter plot code above. Specifically, we will add an argument to the `aes` function, specifying that the points should be coloured by the `category` column:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, we modify our scatter plot code above. Specifically, we will add an argument to the `aes` function, specifying that the points should be coloured by the `category` column:
```

The answer to both these questions is "no." However, with this exploratory data analysis, we can create new hypotheses, ideas,
and questions (like the ones at the beginning of this paragraph). Answering those questions would likely involve gathering additional data and doing more complex analyses, which we will 
see more of later in this course.  

### Putting it all together

Below, we put everything from this chapter together in one code chunk, with a few more layers to make the data visualization even more effective. This demonstrates the power of R: in relatively few lines of code, we are able to create an entire data science workflow.

```{r nachos_to_cheesecake, fig.width=7.75, fig.height=4, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
library(tidyverse)

can_lang <- read_csv("data/can_lang.csv")

can_lang <- mutate(can_lang, mother_tongue = mother_tongue / 35151728)
can_lang <- mutate(can_lang, most_at_home = most_at_home / 35151728)

ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home, 
                     y = mother_tongue, 
                     color = category,
                     shape = category)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.7) +

>   scale_color_manual(values = c("blue3","red3","black")) +

Reviewer: For this last plot, I would colour it so it's the same as the one above since were "putting it all together" it'll show that its the same code as above a bit more

Author: OK, on Slack we discussed that I will keep the more effective plot, but in the writing above state that I add extra layers to do things, and then inline comment the extra new stuff. @leem44  agreed. This is reflected in 
b516099
